The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Code of Honor, by John Lyde Wilson

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: The Code of Honor

Author: John Lyde Wilson

Release Date: July, 2004  [EBook #6085]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on November 3, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, THE CODE OF HONOR ***




This eBook was created by Holly Ingraham

Summary: Originally this was published by the author (1784-1849), a
former governor of South Carolina, as a 22-page booklet, in 1838.
Before his death he added an appendix of the 1777 Irish duelling code,
but this second edition was not printed until 1858, as a 46-page small
book, still sized to fit in the case with one's duelling pistols. This
code is far less blood-thirsty than many might suppose, but built on a
closed social caste and standards of behavior quite alien to today.

Transcriber's Note: In the appendix the term "rencontre" is used. In
British law (then covering Ireland) this refers to an immediate fight
in the heat of offense. A duel would be undertaken in "cold blood" if
not cool temper. Killing a man in a rencontre counted as manslaughter;
in a duel, as murder.

On more than one occasion, the author refers to "posting" an offender.
This refers to posting to the public a notice as to his behavior in
some central club or business spot frequented by all men of that level
of society; exactly where varied from town to town. It was the
ultimate sanction, making the challengee's refusal to either apologize
or fight a public stain upon his character.

THE CODE OF HONOR;
or
RULES FOR THE GOVERNMENT
of
PRINCIPALS AND SECONDS
in
DUELLING

by John Lyde Wilson

TO THE PUBLIC

The man who adds in any way to the sum of human happiness is strictly
in the discharge of a moral duty. When Howard visited the victims of
crime and licentiousness, to reform their habits and ameliorate their
condition, the question was never asked whether he had been guilty of
like excesses or not? The only question the philanthropist would
propound, should be, has the deed been done in the true spirit of
Christian benevolence? Those who know me, can well attest the motive
which has caused the publication of the following sheets, to which
they for a long time urged me in vain. Those who do not know me, have
no right to impute a wrong motive; and if they do, I had rather be the
object, than the authors of condemnation. To publish a CODE OF HONOR,
to govern in cases of individual combat, might seem to imply, that the
publisher was an advocate of duelling, and wished to introduce it as
the proper mode of deciding all personal difficulties and
misunderstandings. Such implication would do me great injustice. But
if the question be directly put to me, whether there are not cases
where duels are right and proper, I would unhesitatingly answer, there
are. If an oppressed nation has a right to appeal to arms in defence
of its liberty and the happiness of its people, there can be no
argument used in support of such appeal, which will not apply with
equal force to individuals. How many cases are there, that might be
enumerated, where there is no tribunal to do justice to an oppressed
and deeply wronged individual? If he be subjected to a tame submission
to insult and disgrace, where no power can shield him from its
effects, then indeed it would seem, that the first law of nature,
self-preservation, points out the only remedy for his wrongs. The
history of all animated nature exhibits a determined resistance to
encroachments upon natural rights,--nay, I might add, inanimate
nature, for it also exhibits a continual warfare for supremacy. Plants
of the same kind, as well as trees, do not stop their vigorous growth
because they overshadow their kind; but, on the contrary, flourish
with greater vigor as the more weak and delicate decline and die.
Those of different species are at perpetual warfare. The sweetest rose
tree will sicken and waste on the near approach of the noxious
bramble, and the most promising fields of wheat yield a miserable
harvest if choked up with tares and thistles. The elements themselves
war together, and the angels of heaven have met in fierce encounter.
The principle of self-preservation is co-extensive with creation; and
when by education we make character and moral worth a part of
ourselves, we guard these possessions with more watchful zeal than
life itself, and would go farther for their protection. When one finds
himself avoided in society, his friends shunning his approach, his
substance wasting, his wife and children in want around him, and
traces all his misfortunes and misery to the slanderous tongue of the
calumniator, who, by secret whisper or artful innuendo, has sapped and
undermined his reputation, he must be more or less than man to submit
in silence.

The indiscriminate and frequent appeal to arms, to settle trivial
disputes and misunderstandings, cannot be too severely censured and
deprecated. I am no advocate of such duelling. But in cases where the
laws of the country give no redress for injuries received, where
public opinion not only authorizes, but enjoins resistance, it is
needless and a waste of time to denounce the practice. It will be
persisted in as long as a manly independence, and a lofty personal
pride in all that dignifies and ennobles the human character, shall
continue to exist. If a man be smote on one cheek in public, and he
turns the other, which is also smitten, and he offers no resistance,
but blesses him that so despitefully used him, I am aware that he is
in the exercise of great Christian forbearance, highly recommended and
enjoined by many very good men, but utterly repugnant to those
feelings which nature and education have implanted in the human
character. If it was possible to enact laws so severe and impossible
to be evaded, as to enforce such rule of behavior, all that is
honorable in the community would quit the country and inhabit the
wilderness with the Indians. If such a course of conduct was infused
by education into the minds of our youth, and it became praiseworthy
and honorable to a man to submit to insult and indignity, then indeed
the forbearance might be borne without disgrace. Those, therefore, who
condemn all who do not denounce duelling in every case, should
establish schools where a passive submission to force would be the
exercise of a commendable virtue. I have not the least doubt, that if
I had been educated in such a school, and lived in such a society, I
would have proved a very good member of it. But I much doubt, if a
seminary of learning was established, where this Christian forbearance
was inculcated and enforced, whether there would be many scholars.

I would not wish to be understood to say, that I do not desire to see
duelling to cease to exist entirely, in society. But my plan for doing
it away, is essentially different from the one which teaches a passive
forbearance to insult and indignity. I would inculcate in the rising
generation a spirit of lofty independence; I would have them taught
that nothing was more derogatory to the honor of a gentleman, than to
wound the feelings of any one, however humble. That if wrong be done
to another, it was more an act of heroism and bravery to repair the
injury, than to persist in error, and enter into mortal combat with
the injured party. This would be an aggravation of that which was
already odious, and would put him without the pale of all decent
society and honorable men. I would strongly inculcate the propriety of
being tender of the feelings, as well as the failings, of those around
him. I would teach immutable integrity, and uniform urbanity of
manners. Scrupulously to guard individual honor, by a high personal
self respect, and the practice of every commendable virtue. Once let
such a system of education be universal, and we should seldom hear, if
ever, of any more duelling.

The severest penal enactments cannot restrain the practice of
duelling, and their extreme severity in this State, the more
effectually shields the offenders. The teaching and preaching of our
eloquent Clergy, may do some service, but is wholly inadequate to
suppress it. Under these circumstances, the following rules are given
to the public, and if I can save the life of one useful member of
society, I will be compensated. I have restored to the bosoms of many,
their sons, by my timely interference, who are ignorant of the misery
I have averted from them. I believe that nine duels out of ten, if not
ninety-nine out of a hundred, originate in the want of experience in
the seconds. A book of authority, to which they can refer in matters
where they are uninformed, will therefore be a desideratum. How far
this code will be that book, the public will decide.

THE AUTHOR

_____________________

RULES for Principals and Seconds in Duelling.
_____________________

CHAPTER I.
The Person Insulted, Before Challenge Sent

1. Whenever you believe that you are insulted, if the insult be in
public and by words or behavior, never resent it there, if you have
self-command enough to avoid noticing it. If resented there, you offer
an indignity to the company, which you should not.

2. If the insult be by blows or any personal indignity, it may be
resented at the moment, for the insult to the company did not
originate with you. But although resented at the moment, you are bound
still to have satisfaction, and must therefore make the demand.

3. When you believe yourself aggrieved, be silent on the subject,
speak to no one about the matter, and see your friend, who is to act
for you, as soon as possible.

4. Never send a challenge in the first instance, for that precludes
all negotiation. Let your note be in the language of a gentleman, and
let the subject matter of complaint be truly and fairly set forth,
cautiously avoiding attributing to the adverse party any improper
motive.

5. When your second is in full possession of the facts, leave the
whole matter to his judgment, and avoid any consultation with him
unless he seeks it. He has the custody of your honor, and by obeying
him you cannot be compromitted.

6. Let the time of demand upon your adversary after the insult, be as
short as possible, for he has the right to double that time in
replying to you, unless you give him some good reason for your delay.
Each party is entitled to reasonable time, to make the necessary
domestic arrangements, by will or otherwise, before fighting.

7. To a written communication you are entitled to a written reply, and
it is the business of your friend to require it.

Second's Duty Before Challenge Sent.

1. Whenever you are applied to by a friend to act as his second,
before you agree to do so, state distinctly to your principal that you
will be governed only by your own judgment,--that he will not be
consulted after you are in full possession of the facts, unless it
becomes necessary to make or accept the amende honorable, or send a
challenge. You are supposed to be cool and collected, and your
friend's feelings are more or less irritated.

2. Use every effort to soothe and tranquilize your principal; do not
see things in the same aggravated light in which he views them;
extenuate the conduct of his adversary whenever you see clearly an
opportunity to do so, without doing violence to your friend's
irritated mind. Endeavor to persuade him that there must have been
some misunderstanding in the matter. Check him if he uses opprobious
epithet towards his adversary, and never permit improper or insulting
words in the note you carry.

3. To the note you carry in writing to the party complained of, you
are entitled to a written answer, which will be directed to your
principal and will be delivered to you by his adversary's friend. If
this be not written in the style of a gentleman, refuse to receive it,
and assign your reason for such refusal. If there be a question made
as to the character of the note, require the second presenting it to
you, who considers it respectful, to endorse upon it these words: "I
consider the note of my friend respectful, and would not have been the
bearer of it, if I believed otherwise."

4. If the party called on, refuses to receive the note you bear, you
are entitled to demand a reason for such refusal. If he refuses to
give you any reason, and persists in such refusal, he treats, not only
your friend, but yourself, with indignity, and you must then make
yourself the actor, by sending a respectful note, requiring a proper
explanation of the course he has pursued towards you and your friend;
and if he still adheres to his determination, you are to challenge or
post him.

5. If the person to whom you deliver the note of your friend, declines
meeting him on the ground of inequality, you are bound to tender
yourself in his stead, by a note directed to him from yourself; and if
he refuses to meet you, you are to post him.

6. In all cases of the substitution of the second for the principal,
the seconds should interpose and adjust the matter, if the party
substituting avows he does not make the quarrel of his principal his
own. The true reason for substitution, is the supposed insult of
imputing to you the like inequality which if charged upon your friend,
and when the contrary is declared, there should be no fight, for
individuals may well differ in their estimate of an individual's
character and standing in society. In case of substitution and a
satisfactory arrangement, you are then to inform your friend of all
the facts, whose duty it will be to post in person.

7. If the party, to whom you present a note, employ a son, father or
brother, as a second, you may decline acting with either on the ground
of consanguinity.

8. If a minor wishes you to take a note to an adult, decline doing so,
on the ground of his minority. But if the adult complained of, had
made a companion of the minor in society, you may bear the note.

9. When an accommodation is tendered, never require too much; and if
the party offering the amende honorable, wishes to give a reason for
his conduct in the matter, do not, unless offensive to your friend,
refuse to receive it; by so doing you may heal the breach more
effectually.

10. If a stranger wishes you to bear a note for him, be well satisfied
before you do so, that he is on an equality with you; and in
presenting the note state to the party the relationship you stand
towards him, and what you know and believe about him; for strangers
are entitled to redress for wrongs, as well as others, and the rules
of honor and hospitality should protect him.

CHAPTER II.
The Party Receiving a Note Before Challenge.

1. When a note is presented to you by an equal, receive it, and read
it, although you may suppose it to be from one you do not intend to
meet, because its requisites may be of a character which may readily
be complied with. But if the requirements of a note cannot be acceded
to, return it, through the medium of your friend, to the person who
handed it to you, with your reason for returning it.

2. If the note received be in abusive terms, object to its reception,
and return it for that reason; but if it be respectful, return an
answer of the same character, in which respond correctly and openly to
all interrogatories fairly propounded, and hand it to your friend,
who, it is presumed, you have consulted, and who has advised the
answer; direct it to the opposite party, and let it be delivered to
his friend.

3. You may refuse to receive a note, from a minor, (if you have not
made an associate of him); one that has been posted; one that has been
publicly disgraced without resenting it; one whose occupation is
unlawful; a man in his dotage and a lunatic. There may be other cases,
but the character of those enumerated will lead to a correct decision
upon those omitted.

If you receive a note from a stranger, you have a right to a
reasonable time to ascertain his standing in society, unless he is
fully vouched for by his friend.

4. If a party delays calling on you for a week or more, after the
supposed insult, and assigns no cause for the delay, if you require
it, you may double the time before you respond to him; for the wrong
cannot be considered aggravated; if borne patiently for some days, and
the time may have been used in preparation and practice.

Second's Duty of the Party Receiving a Note Before Challenge Sent.

1. When consulted by your friend, who has received a note requiring
explanation, inform him distinctly that he must be governed wholly by
you in the progress of the dispute. If he refuses, decline to act on
that ground.

2. Use your utmost efforts to allay all excitement which your
principal may labor under; search diligently into the origin of the
misunderstanding; for gentlemen seldom insult each other, unless they
labor under some misapprehension or mistake; and when you have
discovered the original ground or error, follow each movement to the
time of sending the note, and harmony will be restored.

3. When your principal refuses to do what you require of hi, decline
further acting on that ground, and inform the opposing second of your
withdrawal from the negotiation.

CHAPTER III.
Duty of Challenger and His Second Before Fighting.

1. After all efforts for a reconciliation are over, the party
aggrieved sends a challenge to his adversary, which is delivered to
his second.

2. Upon the acceptance of the challenge, the seconds make the
necessary arrangements for the meeting, in which each party is
entitled to a perfect equality. The old notion that the party
challenged, was authorized to name the time, place, distance and
weapon, has been long since exploded; nor would a man of chivalric
honor use such a right, if he possessed it. The time must e as soon as
practicable, the place such as had ordinarily been used where the
parties are, the distance usual, and the weapons that which is most
generally used, which, in this State, is the pistol.

3. If the challengee insist upon what is not usual in time, place,
distance and weapon, do not yield the point, and tender in writing
what is usual in each, and if he refuses to give satisfaction, then
your friend may post him.

4. If your friend be determined to fight and not post, you have the
right to withdraw. But if you continue to act, and have the right to
tender a still more deadly distance and weapon, and he must accept.

5. The usual distance is from ten to twenty paces, as may be agreed
on; and the seconds in measuring the ground, usually step three feet.

6. After all the arrangements are made, the seconds determine the
giving of the word and position, by lot; and he who gains has the
choice of the one or the other, selects whether it be the word or the
position, but he cannot have both.

CHAPTER IV.
Duty of Challengee and Second After Challenge Sent.

1. The challengee has no option when negotiation has ceased, but to
accept the challenge.

2. The second makes the necessary arrangements with the second of the
person challenging. The arrangements are detailed in the preceding
chapter.

CHAPTER V.
Duty of Principals and Seconds on the Ground.

1. The principals are to be respectful in meeting, and neither by look
or expression irritate each other. They are to be wholly passive,
being entirely under the guidance of their seconds.

2. When once posted, they are not to quit their positions under any
circumstances, without leave or direction of their seconds.

3. When the principals are posted, the second giving the word, must
tell them to stand firm until he repeats the giving of the word, in
the manner it will be given when the parties are at liberty to fire.

4. Each second has a loaded pistol, in order to enforce a fair combat
according to the rules agreed on; and if a principal fires before the
word or time agreed on, he is at liberty to fire at him, and if such
second's principal fall, it is his duty to do so.

5. If after a fire, either party be touched, the duel is to end; and
no second is excusable who permits a wounded friend to fight; and no
second who knows his duty, will permit his friend to fight a man
already hit. I am aware there have been many instances where a contest
has continued, not only after slight, but severe wounds, had been
received. In all such cases, I think the seconds are blamable.

6. If after an exchange of shots, neither party be hit, it is the duty
of the second of the challengee, to approach the second of the
challenger and say: "Our friends have exchanged shots, are you
satisfied, or is there any cause why the contest should be continued?"
If the meeting be of no serious cause of complaint, where the party
complaining had in no way been deeply injured, or grossly insulted,
the second of the party challenging should reply: "The point of honor
being settled, there can, I conceive, be no objection to a
reconciliation, and I propose that our principals meet on middle
ground, shake hands, and be friends." If this be acceded to by the
second of the challengee, the second of the party challenging, says:
"We have agreed that the present duel shall cease, the honor of each
of you is preserved, and you will meet on middle ground, shake hands
and be reconciled."

7. If the insult be of a serious character, it will be the duty of the
second of the challenger, to say, in reply to the second of the
challengee: "We have been deeply wronged, and if you are not disposed
to repair the injury, the contest must continue." And if the
challengee offers nothing by way of reparation, the fight continues
until one or the other of the principals is hit.

8. If in cases where the contest is ended by the seconds, as mentioned
in the sixth rule of this chapter, the parties refuse to meet and be
reconciled, it is the duty of the seconds to withdraw from the field,
informing their principals, that the contest must be continued under
the superintendence of other friends. But if one agrees to this
arrangement of the seconds, and the other does not, the second of the
disagreeing principal only withdraws.

9. If either principal on the ground refuses to fight or continue the
fight when required, it is the duty of his second to say to the other
second: "I have come upon the ground with a coward, and do tender you
my apology for an ignorance of his character; you are at liberty to
post him." The second, by such conduct, stands excused to the opposite
party.

10. When the duel is ended by a party being hit, it is the duty of the
second to the party so hit, to announce the fact to the second of the
party hitting, who will forthwith tender any assistance he can command
to the disabled principal. If the party challenging, hit the
challengee, it is his duty to say he is satisfied, and will leave the
ground. If the challenger be hit, upon the challengee being informed
of it, he should ask through his second, whether he is at liberty to
leave the ground which should be assented to.

CHAPTER VI.
Who Should Be on the Ground.

1. The principals, seconds, one surgeon and one assistant surgeon to
each principal; but the assistant surgeon may be dispensed with.

2. Any number of friends that the seconds agree on, may be present,
provided they do not come within the degrees of consanguinity
mentioned in the seventh rule of Chapter I.

3. Persons admitted on the ground, are carefully to abstain by word or
behavior, from any act that might be the least exceptionable; nor
should they stand near the principals or seconds, or hold
conversations with them.

CHAPTER VII.
Arms, and Manner of Loading and Presenting Them.

1. The arms used should be smooth-bore pistols, not exceeding nine
inches in length, with flint and steel. Percussion pistols may be
mutually used if agreed on, but to object on that account is lawful.

2. Each second informs the other when he is about to load, and invites
his presence, but the seconds rarely attend on such invitation, as
gentlemen may be safely trusted in the matter.

3. The second, in presenting the pistol to his friend, should never
put it in his pistol hand, but should place it in the other, which is
grasped midway the barrel, with muzzle pointing in the contrary way to
that which he is to fire, informing him that his pistol is loaded and
ready for use. Before the word is given, the principal grasps the butt
firmly in his pistol hand, and brings it round, with the muzzle
downward, to the fighting position.

4. The fighting position, is with the muzzle down and the barrel from
you; for although it may be agreed that you may hold your pistol with
the muzzle up, it may be objected to, as you can fire sooner from that
position, and consequently have a decided advantage, which ought not
to be claimed, and should not be granted.

CHAPTER VIII.
The Degrees of Insult, and How Compromised

1. The prevailing rule is, that words used in retort, although more
violent and disrespectful than those first used, will not
satisfy,--words being no satisfaction for words.

2. When words are used, and a blow given in return, the insult is
avenged; and if redress be sought, it must be from the person
receiving the blow.

3. When blows are given in the first instance and not returned, and
the person first striking, be badly beaten or otherwise, the party
first struck is to make the demand, for blows do not satisfy a blow.

4. Insults at a wine table, when the company are over-excited, must be
answered for; and if the party insulting have no recollection of the
insult, it is his duty to say so in writing, and negative the insult.
For instance, if the man say: "you are a liar and no gentleman," he
must, in addition to the plea of the want of recollection, say: "I
believe the party insulted to be a man of the strictest veracity and a
gentleman."

5. Intoxication is not a full excuse for insult, but it will greatly
palliate. If it was a full excuse, it might be well counterfeited to
wound feelings, or destroy character.

6. In all cases of intoxication, the seconds must use a sound
discretion under the above general rules.

7. Can every insult be compromised? is a mooted and vexed question. On
this subject, no rules can be given that will be satisfactory. The old
opinion, that a blow must require blood, is not of force. Blows may be
compromised in many cases. What those are, much depend on the seconds.

APPENDIX.

Since the above Code was in press, a friend has favored me with the
IRISH CODE OF HONOR, which I had never seen; and it is published as an
Appendix to it. One thing must be apparent to every reader, viz., the
marked amelioration of the rules that govern in duelling at the
present time. I am unable to say what code exists now in Ireland, but
I very much doubt whether it be of the same character which it bore in
1777. The American Quarterly Review for September, 1824, in a notice
of Sir Jonah Barrington's history of his own times, has published this
code; and followed it up with some remarks, which I have thought
proper to insert also. The grave reviewer has spoken of certain States
in terms so unlike a gentleman, that I would advise him to look at
home, and say whether he does not think that the manners of his own
countrymen, do not require great amendment? I am very sure, that the
citizens of the States so disrespectfully spoken of, would feel a deep
humiliation, to be compelled to exchange their urbanity of deportment,
for the uncouth incivility of the people of Massachusetts. Look at
their public journals, and you will find them, very generally, teeming
with abuse of private character, which would not be countenanced here.
The idea of New England becoming a school for manners, is about as
fanciful as Bolinbroke's "idea of a patriot king." I like their
fortiter in re, but utterly eschew their suaviter in modo.

"The practice of duelling and points of honor settled at Clonmell
summer assizes, 1777, by the gentleman delegates of Tipperary, Galway,
Mayo, Sligo and Roscommon, and prescribed for general adoption
throughout Ireland.

"Rule 1.--The first offence requires the apology, although the retort
may have been more offensive than the insult.--Example: A. tells B. he
is impertinent, &C.; B. retorts, that he lies; yet A. must make the
first apology, because he gave the first offence, and then, (after one
fire,) B. may explain away the retort by subsequent apology.

"Rule 2.--But if the parties would rather fight on: then, after two
shots each, (but in no case before,) B. may explain first, and A.
apologize afterward.

"Rule 3.--If a doubt exist who gave the first offence, the decision
rests with the seconds; if they won't decide or can't agree, the
matter must proceed to two shots, or a hit, if the challenger requires
it.

"Rule 4.--When the lie direct is the first offence, the aggressor must
either beg pardon in express terms; exchange tow shots previous to
apology; or three shots followed up by explanation; or fire on till a
severe hit be received by one party or the other.

"Rule 5.--As a blow is strictly prohibited under any circumstances
among gentlemen, no verbal apology can be received for such an insult;
the alternatives therefore are: the offender handing a can to the
injured party, to be used on his own back, at the same time begging
pardon; firing on until one or both is disabled; or exchanging three
shots, and then asking pardon without the proffer of the cane.

"If swords are used, the parties engage till one is well-blooded,
disabled or disarmed; or until, after receiving a wound, and blood
being drawn, the aggressor begs pardon.

"N.B. A disarm is considered the same as a disable; the disarmer may
(strictly) break his adversary's sword; but if it be the challenger
who is disarmed, it is considered ungenerous to do so.

"In case the challenged be disarmed and refuses to ask pardon or
atone, he must not be killed as formerly; but the challenger may lay
his sword on the aggressor's shoulder, than break the aggressor's
sword, and say, 'I spare your life!' The challenged can never revive
the quarrel, the challenger may.

"Rule 6.--If A. give B. the lie, and B. retorts by a blow, (being the
two greatest offences,) no reconciliation can take place till after
two discharges each, or a severe hit; after which, B. may beg A.'s
pardon for the blow, and then A. may explain simply for the lie;
because a blow is never allowable, and the offence of the lie
therefore merges in it. (See preceding rule.)

"N.B. Challenges for individual causes, may be reconciled on the
ground, after one shot. An explanation, or the slightest hit should be
sufficient in such cases, because no personal offence transpired.

"Rule 7.--But no apology can be received, in any case, after the
parties have actually taken their ground, without exchange of fires.

"Rule 8.--In the above case, no challenger is obliged to divulge the
cause of his challenge, (if private,) unless required by the
challenged to do so before their meeting.

"Rule 0.--All imputations of cheating at play, races, &c, to be
considered equivalent to a blow; but may be reconciled after one shot,
on admitting their falsehood, and begging pardon publicly.

"Rule 10.--Any insult to a lady under a gentleman's care or
protection, to be considered as, by one degree, a greater offence than
if given to the gentleman personally, and to be regulated accordingly.

"Rule 11.--Offences originating or accruing from the support of a
lady's reputation, to be considered as less unjustifiable than any
other of the same class, and as admitting of lighter apologies by the
aggressor; this to be determined by the circumstances of the case, but
always favorably to the lady.

"Rule 12.--In simple unpremeditated rencontres with the small sword or
couteau-de-chasse, the rule is, first draw, first sheathe; unless
blood be drawn: then both sheathe, and proceed to investigation.

"Rule 13.--No dumb-shooting, or firing in the air, admissible in any
case. The challenger ought not to have challenged without receiving
offence; and the challenged ought, if he gave offence, to have made an
apology before he came on the ground: therefore, children's play must
be dishonorable on one side or the other, and is accordingly
prohibited.

"Rule 14.--Seconds to be of equal rank in society with the principals
they attend, inasmuch as a second may choose or chance to become a
principal, and equality is indispensable.

"Rule 15.--Challenges are never to be delivered at night, unless the
party to be challenged intend leaving the place of offence before
morning; for it is desirable to avoid all hot-headed proceedings.

"Rule 16.--The challenged has the right to choose his own weapon,
unless the challenger gives his honor he is no swordsman; after which,
however, he cannot decline any second species of weapon proposed by
the challenged.

"Rule 17.--The challenged chooses his ground; the challenger chooses
his distance; the seconds fix the time and terms of firing.

"Rule 18.--The seconds load in presence of each other, unless they
give their mutual honors that they have charged smooth and single,
which should be held sufficient.

"Rule 19.--Firing may be regulated, first by signal; secondly, by word
of command; or, thirdly, at pleasure, as may be agreeable to the
parties. In the latter case, the parties may fire at their reasonable
leisure, but second presents and rests are strictly prohibited.

"Rule 20.--In all cases a miss-fire is equivalent to a shot, and a
snap or a non-cock is to be considered as a miss-fire.

"Rule 21.--Seconds are bound to attempt a reconciliation before the
meeting takes place, or after sufficient firing or hits, as specified.

"Rule 22.--Any wound sufficient to agitate the nerves and necessarily
make the hands shake, must end the business for that day.

"Rule 23.--If the cause of meeting be of such a nature that no apology
or explanation can or will be received, the challenged takes his
ground, and calls on the challenger to proceed as he chooses: in such
cases firing at pleasure is the usual practice, but may be varied by
agreement.

"Rule 24.--In slight cases, the second hands his principal but one
pistol; but in gross cases, two, holding another case ready charged in
reserve.

"Rule 25.--When seconds disagree, and resolve to exchange shots
themselves, it must be at the same time and at right angles with their
principals.

"If with swords, side by side, at five paces interval.

"N.B. All matters and doubts not herein mentioned, will be explained
and cleared up by application to the committee, who meet alternately
at Clonmell and Galway, at their quarter sessions, for the purpose.

"CROW RYAN, President."
"JAMES KEOG,
"AMBY BODKIN, Secretaries

ADDITIONAL GALWAY ARTICLES

"Rule 1.--No party can be allowed to bend his knee or cover his side
with his left hand; but may present at any level from the hip to the
eye.

"Rule 2.--One can neither advance nor retreat, if the ground be
measured. If the ground be unmeasured, either party may advance at
pleasure, even to touch muzzle; but neither can advance on his
adversary after the fire, unless his adversary step forward on him.

"The seconds stand responsible for this last rule being strictly
observed; bad cases have accrued from neglecting it."

This precise and enlightened digest was rendered necessary by the
multitude of quarrels that arouse without "sufficient dignified
provocation:" the point of honor men required a uniform government;
and the code thus formed was disseminated throughout the island, with
directions that it should b strictly observed by all gentlemen, and
kept in their pistol cases. The rules, with some others, were commonly
styled "the thirty-six commandments," and, according to the author,
have been much acted upon down to the present day. Tipperary and
Galway were the chief schools of duelling. We remember to have heard,
in travelling to the town of the former name in a stage coach, a
dispute between two Irish companions, on the point, which was the most
gentlemanly country in all Ireland--Tipperary or Galway? and both laid
great stress upon the relative duelling merits of those counties. By
the same criterion, Tennessee, Kentucky, Georgia and South Carolina,
would bear away the palm of gentility among the States of the Union.-





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, THE CODE OF HONOR ***

This file should be named cduel10.txt or cduel10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, cduel11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, cduel10a.txt

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext04 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext04

Or /etext03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

